CORTICAL PARCELLATION PROTOCOL
1. Frontal Lobe(FL)
   1.1. Lateral Surface
        1.1.1. Precentral Gyrus (PrG)
                Anterior: precentral sulcus
                Posterior: central sulcus
                Superior: superior margin of the interhemispheric fissure
                Inferior: lateral margin of the dorsal bank of the lateral fissure
        1.1.2. Superior Frontal Gyrus (SFG)
                Anterior: frontomarginal sulcus
                Posterior: precentral sulcus / plane prcs-med
                Medial: superior margin of interhemispheric fissure
                Inferior: anteriorly: lateral orbital sulcus; posteriorly: middle frontal sulcus
        1.1.3. Middle Frontal Gyrus (MFG)
                Posterior: precentral sulcus
                Superior: superior frontal sulcus
                Inferior: anteriorly: lateral orbital sulcus; posteriorly: inferior frontal sulcus
        1.1.4. Inferior Frontal Gyrus (IFG)
                Posterior: precentral sulcus
                Superior/anterior: anteriorly: lateral orbital sulcus; posteriorly: inferior frontal
                   sulcus
                Inferior: anteriorly: lateral orbital sulcus; posteriorly: lateral orbital sulcus /
                   posterior projection from the posterior limit of the lateral orbital sulcus to the
                   lateral sulcus
        1.1.5. Opercular part of the Inferior Frontal Gyrus (OpIFG; optional: if subdivide
                  IFG)
                Anterior: anterior ascending ramus of the lateral sulcus (aals) / dorsal projection
                   from the superior limit of the aals to the inferior frontal sulcus
                Posterior: precentral sulcus
                Superior: inferior frontal sulcus
                Inferior: (i) if aals branches from the lateral sulcus: lateral sulcus, (ii) if aals
                   branches from the anterior horizontal limb of the lateral sulcus (ahls): ahls;
        1.1.6. Orbital part of the Inferior Frontal Gyrus (OrIFG; optional: if subdivide
                  IFG)
                Anterior: inferior frontal sulcus
                Posterior: lateral sulcus / anterior ascending ramus of the lateral sulcus (aals)
                Superior: anterior horizontal limb of the lateral sulcus (ahls) / anterior projection
                   of the ahls to the inferior frontal sulcus
                Inferior: lateral orbital sulcus / posterior projection from the posterior limit of the
                   lateral orbital sulcus to the lateral sulcus
        1.1.7. Triangular part of the Inferior Frontal Gyrus (TrIFG; optional: if subdivide
                  IFG)
                Anterior/Superior: inferior frontal sulcus
                Posterior: anterior ascending ramus of the lateral sulcus (aals) / dorsal projection
                   from the superior limit of the aals to the inferior frontal sulcus
             Inferior: anterior horizontal limb of the lateral sulcus (ahls)/ anterior projection of
                the ahls to the inferior frontal sulcus
1.2. Medial Surface
     1.2.1. Precentral Gyrus (MPrG; medial segment)
             Anterior: plane prcs-med
             Posterior: plane cs-med
             Superior: superior margin of the interhemispheric sulcus
             Inferior: cingulate sulcus
     1.2.2. Superior Frontal Gyrus (MSFG; medial segment)
             Anterior: anterior hemispheric limit
             Posterior: medial limit of the precentral sulcus
             Superior: interhemispheric fissure, hemispheric margin
             Inferior: anteriorly: superior rostral sulcus; posteriorly: cingulate sulcus; if the
                superior rostral sulcus does not continue to the posterior limit of subcallosal
                cortex and does not intersect with the cingulate sulcus, the inferior boundary
                will be completed by a posterior projection from the posterior limit of the
                superior rostral sulcus to the cingulate sulcus
     1.2.3. Supplementary Motor Cortex (SMC; optional)
             Anterior: posterior limit of the genu of the corpus callosum (plane genu-post)
             Posterior: dorsomedial limit of the precentral sulcus (plane prcs-med)
             Superior: superior margin of the interhemispheric fissure
             Inferior: cingulate sulcus
     1.2.4. Medial Frontal Cortex (MFC; optional)
             Anterior: anterior hemispheric margin
             Posterior: posterior limit of subcallosal cortex
             Superior: anteriorly: superior rostral sulcus; posteriorly: cingulate sulcus; if the
                superior rostral sulcus does not continue to the posterior limit of subcallosal
                cortex and does not intersect with the cingulate sulcus, the superior boundary is
                completed by a posterior projection from the posterior limit of the superior
                rostral sulcus
             Medial: olfactory sulcus
     1.2.5. Gyrus Rectus (GRe; optional: is subset of medial frontal cortex)
             Anterior: anterior hemispheric margin
             Posterior: posterior limit of subcallosal cortex
             Superior: inferior rostral sulcus
             Medial: olfactory sulcus
1.3. Inferior Surface
     1.3.1. Orbitofrontal Cortex (OFC)
             Anterior: frontomarginal sulcus
             Posterior: posterior limit of subcallosal cortex
             Medial: olfactory sulcus
             Lateral: anteriorly: frontomarginal sulcus; posteriorly: lateral orbital sulcus /
                lateral margin of the dorsal bank of the lateral fissure
   1.4. Opercular Region (optional)
        1.4.1. Frontal Operculum (FO)
                Anterior: anterior limit of the insula [alternative: anterior limit of the horizontal
                   ramus of the lateral sulcus]
                Posterior: plane prcs-lat
                Medial: circular sulcus of the insula
                Lateral: lateral margin of the dorsal bank of the lateral sulcus
        1.4.2. Central Operculum (CO)
                Anterior: plane prcs-lat
                Posterior: plane pocs-lat
                Medial: circular sulcus of the insula
                Lateral: lateral margin of the dorsal bank of the lateral sulcus
        1.4.3. Parietal Operculum (PO)
                Anterior: plane pocs-lat
                Posterior: posterior limit of the ventral bank of the ascending ramus of the
                   posterior lateral sulcus
                Medial: circular sulcus of the insula
                Lateral: lateral margin of the dorsal bank of the posterior ascending ramus of the
                   lateral sulcus
   1.5. Insular Region
        1.5.1. Anterior Insula (AIns)
                Anterior/Superior/Inferior: circular sulcus of the insula
                Posterior: central sulcus of the insula
        1.5.2. Posterior Insula (PIns)
                Anterior: central sulcus of the insula
                Posterior/Superior/Inferior: circular sulcus of the insula
2. Temporal Lobe (TL)
   2.1. Lateral Surface
        2.1.1. Superior Temporal Gyrus (STG)
                Anterior: anterior limit of the temporal lobe
                Posterior (see LONI): (i) if a posterior horizontal ramus of the lateral sulcus (phls;
                   note that this ramus of the lateral sulcus is termed the descending ramus by
                   some authors) is present: junction of the posterior descending ramus of the
                   lateral sulcus (phls) and the superior temporal sulcus / posterior projection
                   from the posterior limit of the phls to the superior temporal sulcus; (ii) if a
                   posterior horizontal ramus of the lateral sulcus is not present: junction of the
                   lateral sulcus and the superior temporal sulcus / posterior projection from the
                   posterior limit of the lateral sulcus to the superior temporal sulcus that parallels
                   the trajectory of the lateral sulcus
                Superior: lateral margin of the ventral bank of the lateral sulcus / posterior
                   horizontal ramus of the lateral sulcus
                Inferior: superior temporal sulcus
        2.1.2. Middle Temporal Gyrus (MTG)
             Anterior: anterior limit of inferior temporal sulcus / [optional: anterior projection
                of the inferior temporal sulcus to the anterior limit of temporal lobe]
             Posterior: plane occ-ant
             Superior: superior temporal sulcus; anterior projection of the inferior temporal
                sulcus to the anterior limit of temporal lobe
             Inferior: inferior temporal sulcus
     2.1.3. Inferior Temporal Gyrus (ITG)
             Anterior: anterior limit of inferior temporal sulcus / [optional: anterior projection
                of the inferior temporal sulcus to the anterior limit of temporal lobe]
             Posterior: plane occ-ant
             Superior: inferior temporal sulcus
             Inferior: occipitotemporal sulcus
2.2. Supratemporal Surface (optional)
     2.2.1. Planum Polare (PP)
             Anterior: plane tf-jnct
             Posterior: junction of the first transverse sulcus and the circular sulcus of the
                insula
             Medial: circular sulcus of the insula
             Lateral: lateral margin of the ventral bank of the posterior lateral sulcus
     2.2.2. Transverse Temporal Gyrus (TTG)
             Anterior: first transverse sulcus, anterior limit
             Posterior: posterior limit of Heschl’s suclus
             Medial: anteriorly: first transverse temporal sulcus; intermediately: circular sulcus
                of the insula; posteriorly: lateral sulcus
             Lateral: anteriorly: lateral margin of the ventral bank of the posterior lateral
                sulcus; posteriorly: Heschl’s sulcus (most anterior sulcus coursing postero-
                medially to antero-laterally along the ventral bank of the lateral sulcus that
                arises from the retroinsular region of the lateral sulcus); if an intermediate
                transverse temporal sulcus is present (sulcus lying between the first transverse
                sulcus and Heschl’s sulcus that does not extend posteriorly to the circular
                sulcus or the retroinsular region of the lateral sulcus, the lateral border is
                formed by the intermediate tranverse temporal sulcus for regions anterior to the
                anterior limit of the Heschl’s sulcus (see Kim et al.,2000, for greater detail)
     2.2.3. Planum Temporal (PT)
             Anterior: anterior limit of Heschl’s sulcus
             Posterior: posterior limit of the ventral bank of the ascending ramus of the
                posterior lateral sulcus
             Medial: anteriorly: Heschl’s sulcus; if an intermediate transverse temporal sulcus
                is present, the medial border is formed by this sulcus for regions anterior to the
                anterior limit of Heschl’s sulcus (see Kim et al.,2000): posteriorly: lateral
                sulcus / posterior ascending ramus of the lateral sulcus
             Lateral: lateral margin of the ventral bank of the lateral sulcus / posterior
                ascending ramus of the lateral sulcus
2.3. Inferior Surface
        2.3.1. Fusiform Gyrus (FuG)
                Anterior: anterior limit of the occipitotemporal sulcus
                Posterior: plane pos-ant (if divide into Fusiform and Occipital Fusiform segments)
                   [alternative: temporooccipital notch]
                Medial: collateral sulcus
                Lateral: occipitotemporal sulcus
3. Parietal lobe (PL)
   3.1. Lateral Surface
        3.1.1. Postcentral Gyrus (PoG)
                Anterior: central sulcus
                Posterior: postcentral sulcus
                Superior: superior margin of the interhemispheric fissure
                Inferior: lateral margin of the dorsal bank of the posterior lateral fissure
        3.1.2. Supramarginal Gyrus (SMG)
                Anterior: postcentral sulcus
                Posterior: primary intermediate sulcus (pis) / inferior projection from the inferior
                   limit of pis to the superior temporal sulcus
                Superior: intraparietal sulcus
                Inferior: anterior to the posterior limit of the posterior lateral sulcus (pls): lateral
                   margin of the dorsal bank of the pls; posterior to pls: superior temporal sulcus
        3.1.3. Superior Parietal Lobule (SPL)
                Anterior: postcentral sulcus
                Posterior: plane occ-ant
                Superior: superior margin of the interhemispheric sulcus
                Inferior: intraparietal sulcus
        3.1.4. Angular Gyrus (AnG)
                Anterior: primary intermediate sulcus (pis) / inferior projection from the inferior
                   limit of pis to the superior temporal sulcus
                Posterior: plane occ-ant
                Superior: intraparietal sulcus
                Inferior: superior temporal sulcus, anterior occipital sulcus, or lateral occipital
                   sulcus (see Crespo-Facarro for convention)
   3.2. Medial Surface
        3.2.1. Postcentral Gyrus (MPoG, medial segment)
                Anterior: plane cs-med ;
                Posterior: marginal ramus of the cingulate sulcus
                Superior: interhemispheric margin
                Inferior: cingulate sulcus
        3.2.2. Precuneus (PCu)
                Anterior: superiorly: marginal ramus of the cingulate sulcus (superior region);
                   inferiorly: subparietal sulcus; if the subparietal sulcus does not intersect the
                   calcarine sulcus, an inferior projection from the inferior limit of the subparietal
                   sulcus to the calcarine sulcus serves as the anterior boundary
                Posterior: parietooccipital sulcus
                Superior: superior margin of the interhemispheric sulcus
                Inferior: superiorly: subparietal sulcus; if the subparietal sulcus does not intersect
                   the cingulate sulcus, a projection from the anterior limit of the subparietal
                   sulcus to the nearest point of the cingulate sulcus will serve as the inferior
                   boundary; inferiorly: calcarine sulcus
4. Occipital Lobe (OL)
   4.1. Lateral Surface
        4.1.1. Superior Occipital Gyrus (SOG)
                Anterior: plane occ-ant
                Posterior: posterior margin of the interhemispheric sulcus
                Superior: superior margin of the interhemispheric sulcus
                Inferior: lateral occipital sulcus (locs); if the locs does not intersect the
                   hemispheric margin, a posterior projection from the posterior limit of the locs
                   to the posterior hemispheric margin serves as the superior boundary
        4.1.2. Inferior Occipital Gyrus (IOG)
                Anterior: plane occ-ant
                Posterior: posterior margin of the interhemispheric sulcus
                Superior: lateral occipital sulcus (locs); if the locs does not intersect the
                   hemispheric margin, a posterior projection from the posterior limit of the locs
                   to the posterior hemispheric margin serves as the superior boundary
                Inferior: occipitotemporal sulcus (ots); if the ots does not extend to the posterior
                   cortical limit, a posterior projection from the posterior limit of ots serves as the
                   lateral boundary
        4.1.3. Middle Occipital Gyrus (MOG; optional)
                Anterior: plane occ-ant
                Posterior: (i) if the junction lateral occipital sulcus (locs) and the intraparietal
                   sulcus (itps) meet the posterior hemispheric margin: the posterior hemispheric
                   margin; (ii) if the locs, and itps meet: the junction of the locs and itps; (iii) if
                   the locs and itps do not meet, the boundaries in the posterior aspect of the
                   region will be served by a posterior projection from the posterior limit of the
                   locs and an inferior projection of the itps
                Superior: intraparietal sulcus (ipts); if the itps does not meet the posterior
                   hemispheric margin, an inferior projection from the inferior limit of the itps
                   will serve as the superior boundary
                Inferior: lateral occipitotemporal sulcus (locs); if the locs does not meet the
                   posterior hemispheric margin, a posterior projection from the posterior limit of
                   the itps will serve as the inferior boundary
   4.2. Inferior Surface
        4.2.1. Occipital Fusiform Gyrus (OFuG, optional)
                Anterior: plane pos-ant [alternative: temporooccipital notch]
                Posterior: posterior hemispheric margin
                Medial: collateral sulcus
                Lateral: occipitotemporal sulcus (ots); if the ots does not intersect the posterior
                   hemispheric margin, a posterior projection from the posterior limit of ots
                   serves as the lateral boundary
   4.3. Medial Surface
        4.3.1. Cuneus (Cun)
                Anterior: parietooccipital sulcus
                Posterior: posterior hemispheric margin
                Superior: superior margin of the interhemispheric sulcus
                Inferior: lateral margin of the dorsal bank of the calcarine sulcus
        4.3.2. Calcarine Cortex (Calc, optional)
                Anterior: parietooccipital sulcus
                Posterior: posterior limit of the calcarine sulcus
                Superior: lateral margin of the dorsal bank of the calcarine sulcus
                Inferior: lateral margin of the ventral bank of the calcarine sulcus
        4.3.3. Lingual Gyrus (LiG)
                Anterior: anterior limit of the calcarine sulcus [a suitable alternative would be the
                   posterior limit of the hippocampus]
                Posterior: posterior hemispheric margin
                Medial: calcarine sulcus
                Lateral: collateral sulcus / posterior projection of the lateral sulcus to the
                   hemispheric margin (see Crespo-Facarro for conventions)
5. Limbic Cortex
        5.1.1. Cingulate Gyrus (CgG)
                Anterior: anterior limit of the cingulate sulcus; if a “double parallel” cingulate
                   sulcus is present (paracingulate sulcus), the anterior-most sulcus will serve as
                   the anterior boundary
                Posterior: posterior limit of the subparietal sulcus
                Superior: cingulate sulcus; if a “double parallel” cingulate sulcus is present
                   (paracingulate sulcus), the superior-most sulcus will serve as the superior
                   boundary
                Inferior: callosal sulcus
                Anterior subcallosal area:
                             Posterior: posterior limit of subcallosal cortex (marked by the presence
                                 of the septal nuclei)
                             Superior: callosal sulcus
                             Inferior: anteriorly: cingulate sulcus; posteriorly (if no subcallosal
                                 area): a posterior projection from the posterior limit of the
                                 cingulate sulcus servers of the inferior boundary
                Posterior subcallosal area:
                             Posterior: anterior limit of the calcarine sulcus
                             Superior: callosal sulcus
                             Inferior: anteriorly: cingulate sulcus; posteriorly: a posterior
                                 projection from the posterior limit of the cingulate
        5.1.2. Subdivisions of the cingulate gyrus (optional)
        Several protocols divide the cingulate gyrus into two, three, and as many as four
        subregions using various landmarks. The landmarks used may be distant from the
        cingulate gyrus (IOWA, MGH-CMA, MGH-Desikan) and relatively unreliable
        (MGH-CMA). I believe it is useful to offer some subdivision of the cingulate
        gyrus, perhaps based upon callosal landmarks, which are relatively easy to
        identify but require orientation to a standard reference frame. A simple
        subdivision might be:
                    Genual (or Anterior) Cingulate Gyrus: cingulate gyrus anterior to the
                         posterior limit of the genu of the corpus callosum
                    Middle Cingulate Gyrus: cingulate gyrus posterior to the posterior
                         limit of the genu of the corpus callosum and the anterior limit of
                         the splenium
                    Splenial (or Posterior) Cingulate Gyrus: cingulate gyrus posterior to
                         the anterior limit of the splenium.
        An alternative division that respects a common frontal and parietal lobe division
        (intersection of the central sulcus and the interhemispheric margin):
                    Anterior Cingulate Gyrus: cingulate gyrus anterior to the medial limit
                         of the central sulcus.
                    Posterior Cingulate Gyrus: cingulate gyrus anterior to the medial limit
                         of the central sulcus.
        If the anterior cingulate given by this method is further subdivided at the posterior
        limit of the genu of the corpus callosum, the resulting cingulate subdivision are
        consistent with the IOWA method.
5.1.3. Subcallosal Area (optional)
        The IOWA and MGH-CMA include a subcallosal ROI that lies posterior to the
        posterior limit of the genu of the corpus callosum. The IOWA definition extends
        from the callosal sulcus superiorly to an axial-oriented dividing plane that marks
        the superior border of the straight gyrus (gyrus rectus) inferiorly. This plane is
        given by the superior limit of olfactory sulcus. The MGH-CMA definition has the
        subcallosal ROI extend inferiorly to the olfactory sulcus. I suggest that if a
        subcallosal cortex region is included, we use the genu-based anterior-posterior
        boundary and extend the region inferiorly to the inferior rostral sulcus (the
        proposed superior/medial boundary of the gyrus rectus).
5.1.4. Parahippocampal Gyrus (PHG)
        Anterior: anterior limit of the collateral sulcus (plane cos-ant)
        Posterior: anterior limit of the calcarine sulcus [a suitable alternative would be the
            posterior limit of the hippocampus]
        Medial: CMA/Neuromorphometric definition for amygdale/hippocampus: a line
            projecting from the dorso-medial limit of the parahippocampal white matter to
            the dorsomedial limit of the temporal cortex. This boundary is meant to include
            the subiculum, presubiculum, and parasubiculum within the hippocampus ROI
            during the segmentation procedure. [The segmentation is carefully done by an
            experienced rater so I think we should simply rely on this for the medial
            parahippocampal gyrus boundary. A good alternative that relies more
            completely on sulci is the Crespo-Facarro method].
        Lateral: collateral sulcus
5.1.5. Entorhinal Area (Ent, optional)
       Included in Desikan et al., labeled portion of gyrus medial to collateral sulcus that
          lies anterior to the caudal limit of the amygdala.
